README.md, before:

# Custom Magic Rules

## Introduction

Magic in many game systems has always annoyed me due to the lack of flexibility involved. I feel magic users, certainly general magic users, shoud have a diversity and flexibility to be creative. It is the very unpredictability of what a magic user can accomplish that makes them so impressive (and scary).

## Rules

In this system, magic users will have mana/power points that they can spend on a magical effect. They 'concoct' spells by spending points on the 'ingredients'.

Because of the nearly infinite combinations of ingredients and effects possible, **all spells are subject to GM approval**. If the GM feel some effect is too powerful or disruptive, they may disallow it or modify the conditions of its use.

The power level indicates an increase in power through experience. There are 5 power levels and you can map them to whatever form of advancement system you want to use, whether class levels or something else. Having a higher power level means that each mana/power point gets you a more powerful result.

You can also consider, when leveling up your magic users, whether or not their mana/power point pool also increases. Doing so would mean that you get **very** powerful magic users at higher levels.

**Note:** Values in imperial units have been creatively rounded so that it's easier to calculate with them.

<table>
    <tr>
        <th rowspan="2">Effect</th>
        <th rowspan="2">Description</th>
        <th colspan="8">Power Level</th>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td align="center", colspan="8">Expending 1 power point gives (use appropriate column):</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <th></th>
        <th></th>
        <th>1</th>
        <th>2</th>
        <th>3</th>
        <th>4</th>
        <th>5</th>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>Area</td>
        <td>The radius from the target of the spell, in which the spell effects are active. The target of the spell is generally centered on the caster, unless they use the `Range` ingredient to cast the spell further away from them.</td>
        <td>5 meter (15 ft) radius</td>
        <td>10 meters (30 ft) radius</td>
        <td>50 meters (160 ft) radius</td>
        <td>100 meters (300 ft) radius</td>
        <td>500 meters (1500 ft) radius</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>Conjuration</td>
        <td>Summoning something out of 'nothing'. Depending on your character/setting, this could be summoning items/creatures out of another dimension/plane, or summoning them out of nothing.</td>
        <td>1 creature/item.</td>
        <td>2 creatures/items.</td>
        <td>3 creature/item.</td>
        <td>4 creature/item.</td>
        <td>5 creature/item.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>Divination</td>
        <td>Knowing or sensing things. This ingredient depends greatly on the GM's discretion. Adding this ingredient allows you to read languages you do not know, detect/identify magic(al items), speak in tongues, find traps, etc. When it comes to detecting magic, 1 trait is equivalent to 1 ingredient. So depending on how much you spend, you may or may not know all the ingredients that went into a spell!</td>
        <td>Know 1 trait/property of what you wish to know.</td>
        <td>Know 2 traits/properties of what you wish to know.</td>
        <td>Know 3 traits/properties of what you wish to know.</td>
        <td>Know 4 traits/properties of what you wish to know.</td>
        <td>Know 5 traits/properties of what you wish to know.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>Duration</td>
        <td>How long the spell effects last for. A few durations have been specified, which ones apply is up to the GM's discretion (some spells logically short-lived in terms of rounds/minutes, others, like a disguise spell may make sense to work for hours).</td>
        <td>1 round / 1 hour / 1 day</td>
        <td>2 rounds / 2 hours / 2 days</td>
        <td>3 rounds / 3 hours / 3 days</td>
        <td>4 rounds / 4 hours / 4 days</td>
        <td>5 rounds / 5 hours / 5 days</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>Enchantment</td>
        <td>This ingredient has to do with affecting the minds of other creatures. Charm/fear/confusion/hold spells fall under this category</td>
        <td>1 creature. +1 save difficulty (max: +2 per spell)</td>
        <td>2 creatures. +1 save difficulty (max: +3 per spell)</td>
        <td>3 creatures. +2 save difficulty (max: +4 per spell)</td>
        <td>4 creatures. +2 save difficulty (max: +6 per spell)</td>
        <td>5 creatures. +3 save difficulty (max: +6 per spell)</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>Elemental</td>
        <td>Imbue your spell with elemental energies such as fire, ice, wind, lightning, but also mystical energies (think raw magical power). Expressed in terms of damage such powers will almost always have an impact on creatures or things. The numbers given suggest some ideas, but you will have to tailor this row to the system's damage rules.</td>
        <td>Fudge: +1 (max: +3 per spell)<br/>D&D: 1d4 </td>
        <td>Fudge: +1 (max: +4 per spell)<br/>D&D: 1d6 </td>
        <td>Fudge: +2 (max: +4 per spell)<br/>D&D: 1d8 </td>
        <td>Fudge: +2 (max: +6 per spell)<br/>D&D: 1d10 </td>
        <td>Fudge: +3 (max: +12 per spell)<br/>D&D: 1d12 </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>Illusion</td>
        <td>Casting an illusion to fool the senses. Every point spent on this ingredient (up to the stated maximum value per turn) increases the difficulty for someone to spot the illusion.</td>
        <td>Fudge: +1 to save difficulty (max: +2 per spell)</td>
        <td>Fudge: +1 to save difficulty (max: +3 per spell)</td>
        <td>Fudge: +2 to save difficulty (max: +4 per spell)</td>
        <td>Fudge: +2 to save difficulty (max: +6 per spell)</td>
        <td>Fudge: +3 to save difficulty (max: +6 per spell)</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>Life</td>
        <td>This ingredient has to do with all things living, dead and undead. It deals with life energy and un/anti-life energies. Additionally, this ingredient covers healing spells.</td>
        <td>Heal/deal 1 hit point of damage (max: 5 hit points per spell). Raise/summon 1 spirit/undead.</td>
        <td>Heal/deal 2 hit points of damage (max: 6 hit points per spell). Raise/summon 2 spirits/undead.</td>
        <td>Heal/deal 3 hit points of damage (max: 9 hit points per spell). Raise/summon 3 spirits/undead.</td>
        <td>Heal/deal 4 hit points of damage (max: 12 hit points per spell). Raise/summon 4 spirits/undead.</td>
        <td>Heal/deal 5 hit points of damage (max: 15 hit points per spell). Raise/summon 5 spirits/undead.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>Mass/Material</td>
        <td>Magically create something 'real'. This could be creating something out of nothing, or transmuting one thing into another. It is based on mass as an expression of the 'amount of reality'. Light materials are easier to create, denser ones require more power. Want your magic bolt to turn into an actual spear or arrow in mid-air? This is the ingredient you need to add.</td>
        <td>1 kg (2 lbs)</td>
        <td>5 kg (10 lbs)</td>
        <td>10 kg (20 lbs)</td>
        <td>100 kg (220 lbs)</td>
        <td>1000 kg (2200 lbs)</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>Range</td>
        <td>The distance, as a linear vector, over which the spell effect can be applied.</td>
        <td>Up to 5 meters (15 ft) away</td>
        <td>Up to 10 meters (30 ft) away</td>
        <td>Up to 50 meters (160 ft) away</td>
        <td>Up to 100 meters (300 ft) away</td>
        <td>Up to 500 meters (1500 ft) away</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>Sympathetic Magic</td>
        <td>Sympathetic magic has to do with the connection between things. This is a surprisingly broad category. It includes things like magnetism and protect from evil or good (essentially repelling/attracting a certain class of being), but also includes things like teleport (connecting two places), telepathy (connecting minds) and scrying (viewing a distant place).</td>
        <td>1 creature/item (repel/attract/connect to). 1 location you know or have an item from per 10 points (teleportation/scrying)</td>
        <td>3 creatures/items (repel/attract/connect to). 1 location you know or have an item from per 8 points (teleportation/scrying)</td>
        <td>5 creatures/items (repel/attract/connect to). 1 location you know or have an item from per 6 points (teleportation/scrying)</td>
        <td>10 creatures/items (repel/attract/connect to). 2 locations you know or have an item from per 6 points (teleportation/scrying)</td>
        <td>20 creatures/items (repel/attract/connect to). 5 locations you have heard of per 5 points (teleportation/scrying)</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>Time</td>
        <td>Allows you to manipulate the properties of time. A slow spell or a speed spell, generally. This ingredient **does not** allow you to manipulate your spell duration (see relevant ingredient). An aging spell could use either this ingredient or the `Life` ingredient (freezing someone in time or slowing aging vs strengthening life energy/life span). Exotic uses like viewing the future, or time travel, are left to the direction of the GM.</td>
        <td>2x or 1/2x the time something takes (max: 3 points per spell)</td>
        <td>3x or 1/3x the time something takes (max: 4 points per spell)</td>
        <td>4x or 1/4x the time something takes (max: 5 points per spell)</td>
        <td>5x or 1/5x the time something takes (max: 6 points per spell)</td>
        <td>6x or 1/6x the time something takes (no maximum)</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>Transformation</td>
        <td>The ability to change one thing/being into another. In the descriptions, 'material' refers to 1 element (for instance: lead into gold, etc). The rarer the material, the more difficult to transmute and the smaller the amount is that you can transmute. Turning stone into wool is easier (and can be done in greater volumes) than turning stone into gold. If it were so easy to transmute them, magic users would be flooding the markets with tons of transmuted valuables!</td>
        <td>Transmute 1 material into another. Transform 1 creature per 10 points.</td>
        <td>Transmute 2 materials. Transform 1 creature per 8 points.</td>
        <td>Transmute 3 materials. Transform 1 creature per 6 points.</td>
        <td>Transmute 4 materials. Transform 1 creature per 4 points.</td>
        <td>Transmute 5 materials. Transform 1 creature per 2 points.</td>
    </tr>
</table>

Commit message:

Split mana section from rules section

README.md, after:

# Custom Magic Rules

## Introduction

Magic in many game systems has always annoyed me due to the lack of flexibility involved. I feel magic users, certainly general magic users, shoud have a diversity and flexibility to be creative. It is the very unpredictability of what a magic user can accomplish that makes them so impressive (and scary).

## Mana / Power Points

In this system, magic users will have mana/power points that they can spend on a magical effect. They 'concoct' spells by spending points on the 'ingredients'.

The source of these power points can be diverse and we encourage creativity in this respect. The power could be a reservoir of power internal to the character, or they could draw from nature around them, from the power of music, from the blessings of deities, etc. If you wanted to have a blood magician, then their power could stem from blood. How they gain and replenish this power is up to the GM, the setting and the character.

Similarly, not all of the ingredients below need to be on offer. An illusionist may only have access to the area, duration, range and illusion ingredients. If they influence the minds of others as well, perhaps enchantment. If their illusions have a little bite, perhaps evocation or material/mass, etc.

The idea is to provide a flexible system that also allows players to add their own color, creativity and style to their magic users.

## Rules

Because of the nearly infinite combinations of ingredients and effects possible, **all spells are subject to GM approval**. If the GM feels some effect is too powerful or disruptive, they may disallow it or modify the conditions of its use.

The power level indicates an increase in power through experience. There are 5 power levels and you can map them to whatever form of advancement system you want to use, whether class levels or something else. Having a higher power level means that each mana/power point gets you a more powerful result.

You can also consider, when leveling up your magic users, whether or not their mana/power point pool also increases. Doing so would mean that you get **very** powerful magic users at higher levels.

**Note:** Values in imperial units have been creatively rounded so that it's easier to calculate with them.

<table>
    <tr>
        <th rowspan="2">Effect</th>
        <th rowspan="2">Description</th>
        <th colspan="8">Power Level</th>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td align="center", colspan="8">Expending 1 power point gives (use appropriate column):</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <th></th>
        <th></th>
        <th>1</th>
        <th>2</th>
        <th>3</th>
        <th>4</th>
        <th>5</th>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>Area</td>
        <td>The radius from the target of the spell, in which the spell effects are active. The target of the spell is generally centered on the caster, unless they use the `Range` ingredient to cast the spell further away from them.</td>
        <td>5 meter (15 ft) radius</td>
        <td>10 meters (30 ft) radius</td>
        <td>50 meters (160 ft) radius</td>
        <td>100 meters (300 ft) radius</td>
        <td>500 meters (1500 ft) radius</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>Conjuration</td>
        <td>Summoning something out of 'nothing'. Depending on your character/setting, this could be summoning items/creatures out of another dimension/plane, or summoning them out of nothing.</td>
        <td>1 creature/item.</td>
        <td>2 creatures/items.</td>
        <td>3 creature/item.</td>
        <td>4 creature/item.</td>
        <td>5 creature/item.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>Divination</td>
        <td>Knowing or sensing things. This ingredient depends greatly on the GM's discretion. Adding this ingredient allows you to read languages you do not know, detect/identify magic(al items), speak in tongues, find traps, etc. When it comes to detecting magic, 1 trait is equivalent to 1 ingredient. So depending on how much you spend, you may or may not know all the ingredients that went into a spell!</td>
        <td>Know 1 trait/property of what you wish to know.</td>
        <td>Know 2 traits/properties of what you wish to know.</td>
        <td>Know 3 traits/properties of what you wish to know.</td>
        <td>Know 4 traits/properties of what you wish to know.</td>
        <td>Know 5 traits/properties of what you wish to know.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>Duration</td>
        <td>How long the spell effects last for. A few durations have been specified, which ones apply is up to the GM's discretion (some spells logically short-lived in terms of rounds/minutes, others, like a disguise spell may make sense to work for hours).</td>
        <td>1 round / 1 hour / 1 day</td>
        <td>2 rounds / 2 hours / 2 days</td>
        <td>3 rounds / 3 hours / 3 days</td>
        <td>4 rounds / 4 hours / 4 days</td>
        <td>5 rounds / 5 hours / 5 days</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>Enchantment</td>
        <td>This ingredient has to do with affecting the minds of other creatures. Charm/fear/confusion/hold spells fall under this category</td>
        <td>1 creature. +1 save difficulty (max: +2 per spell)</td>
        <td>2 creatures. +1 save difficulty (max: +3 per spell)</td>
        <td>3 creatures. +2 save difficulty (max: +4 per spell)</td>
        <td>4 creatures. +2 save difficulty (max: +6 per spell)</td>
        <td>5 creatures. +3 save difficulty (max: +6 per spell)</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>Elemental</td>
        <td>Imbue your spell with elemental energies such as fire, ice, wind, lightning, but also mystical energies (think raw magical power). Expressed in terms of damage such powers will almost always have an impact on creatures or things. The numbers given suggest some ideas, but you will have to tailor this row to the system's damage rules.</td>
        <td>Fudge: +1 (max: +3 per spell)<br/>D&D: 1d4 </td>
        <td>Fudge: +1 (max: +4 per spell)<br/>D&D: 1d6 </td>
        <td>Fudge: +2 (max: +4 per spell)<br/>D&D: 1d8 </td>
        <td>Fudge: +2 (max: +6 per spell)<br/>D&D: 1d10 </td>
        <td>Fudge: +3 (max: +12 per spell)<br/>D&D: 1d12 </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>Illusion</td>
        <td>Casting an illusion to fool the senses. Every point spent on this ingredient (up to the stated maximum value per turn) increases the difficulty for someone to spot the illusion.</td>
        <td>Fudge: +1 to save difficulty (max: +2 per spell)</td>
        <td>Fudge: +1 to save difficulty (max: +3 per spell)</td>
        <td>Fudge: +2 to save difficulty (max: +4 per spell)</td>
        <td>Fudge: +2 to save difficulty (max: +6 per spell)</td>
        <td>Fudge: +3 to save difficulty (max: +6 per spell)</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>Life</td>
        <td>This ingredient has to do with all things living, dead and undead. It deals with life energy and un/anti-life energies. Additionally, this ingredient covers healing spells.</td>
        <td>Heal/deal 1 hit point of damage (max: 5 hit points per spell). Raise/summon 1 spirit/undead.</td>
        <td>Heal/deal 2 hit points of damage (max: 6 hit points per spell). Raise/summon 2 spirits/undead.</td>
        <td>Heal/deal 3 hit points of damage (max: 9 hit points per spell). Raise/summon 3 spirits/undead.</td>
        <td>Heal/deal 4 hit points of damage (max: 12 hit points per spell). Raise/summon 4 spirits/undead.</td>
        <td>Heal/deal 5 hit points of damage (max: 15 hit points per spell). Raise/summon 5 spirits/undead.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>Mass/Material</td>
        <td>Magically create something 'real'. This could be creating something out of nothing, or transmuting one thing into another. It is based on mass as an expression of the 'amount of reality'. Light materials are easier to create, denser ones require more power. Want your magic bolt to turn into an actual spear or arrow in mid-air? This is the ingredient you need to add.</td>
        <td>1 kg (2 lbs)</td>
        <td>5 kg (10 lbs)</td>
        <td>10 kg (20 lbs)</td>
        <td>100 kg (220 lbs)</td>
        <td>1000 kg (2200 lbs)</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>Range</td>
        <td>The distance, as a linear vector, over which the spell effect can be applied.</td>
        <td>Up to 5 meters (15 ft) away</td>
        <td>Up to 10 meters (30 ft) away</td>
        <td>Up to 50 meters (160 ft) away</td>
        <td>Up to 100 meters (300 ft) away</td>
        <td>Up to 500 meters (1500 ft) away</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>Sympathetic Magic</td>
        <td>Sympathetic magic has to do with the connection between things. This is a surprisingly broad category. It includes things like magnetism and protect from evil or good (essentially repelling/attracting a certain class of being), but also includes things like teleport (connecting two places), telepathy (connecting minds) and scrying (viewing a distant place).</td>
        <td>1 creature/item (repel/attract/connect to). 1 location you know or have an item from per 10 points (teleportation/scrying)</td>
        <td>3 creatures/items (repel/attract/connect to). 1 location you know or have an item from per 8 points (teleportation/scrying)</td>
        <td>5 creatures/items (repel/attract/connect to). 1 location you know or have an item from per 6 points (teleportation/scrying)</td>
        <td>10 creatures/items (repel/attract/connect to). 2 locations you know or have an item from per 6 points (teleportation/scrying)</td>
        <td>20 creatures/items (repel/attract/connect to). 5 locations you have heard of per 5 points (teleportation/scrying)</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>Time</td>
        <td>Allows you to manipulate the properties of time. A slow spell or a speed spell, generally. This ingredient **does not** allow you to manipulate your spell duration (see relevant ingredient). An aging spell could use either this ingredient or the `Life` ingredient (freezing someone in time or slowing aging vs strengthening life energy/life span). Exotic uses like viewing the future, or time travel, are left to the direction of the GM.</td>
        <td>2x or 1/2x the time something takes (max: 3 points per spell)</td>
        <td>3x or 1/3x the time something takes (max: 4 points per spell)</td>
        <td>4x or 1/4x the time something takes (max: 5 points per spell)</td>
        <td>5x or 1/5x the time something takes (max: 6 points per spell)</td>
        <td>6x or 1/6x the time something takes (no maximum)</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>Transformation</td>
        <td>The ability to change one thing/being into another. In the descriptions, 'material' refers to 1 element (for instance: lead into gold, etc). The rarer the material, the more difficult to transmute and the smaller the amount is that you can transmute. Turning stone into wool is easier (and can be done in greater volumes) than turning stone into gold. If it were so easy to transmute them, magic users would be flooding the markets with tons of transmuted valuables!</td>
        <td>Transmute 1 material into another. Transform 1 creature per 10 points.</td>
        <td>Transmute 2 materials. Transform 1 creature per 8 points.</td>
        <td>Transmute 3 materials. Transform 1 creature per 6 points.</td>
        <td>Transmute 4 materials. Transform 1 creature per 4 points.</td>
        <td>Transmute 5 materials. Transform 1 creature per 2 points.</td>
    </tr>
</table>
